2023-01-20 / 18:02

Status: #idea
Tags: 

# The problem of generating new data points from existing data
The problem is that we do not know pdata explicitly—all we have to work with is the sample of observations X generated by pdata. The goal of generative modeling is to use these observations to build a pmodel that can accurately mimic the observations produced by pdata. To achieve this, we could simply assign a probability to each possible combination of features, based on the data we have seen. 

This particular class of parametric model is known as a multinomial distribution, and the maximum likelihood estimate 
θj^ of each parameter is given by:

θj^=nj/N

where nj is the number of times that combination j was observed in the dataset and N is the total number of observations.

In other words, the estimate for each parameter is just the proportion of times that its corresponding combination was observed in the dataset.

We can calculate all of the θj^ values in this way, to define a distribution over our sample space. Since we can sample from this distribution, our list could potentially be called a generative model. However, it fails in one major respect: it can never generate anything that it hasn’t already seen, since 
θj^ = 0 for any combination that wasn’t in the original dataset X.

To address this, we could assign an additional pseudocount of 1 to each possible combination of features. This is known as additive smoothing. Under this model, our MLE for the parameters would be:

θj^=nj+1/N+d

Now, every single combination has a nonzero probability of being sampled, including those that were not in the original dataset. However, this still fails to be a satisfactory generative model, because the probability of observing a point not in the original dataset is just a constant. If we tried to use such a model to generate Picasso paintings, it would assign just as much weight to a random collection of colorful pixels as to a replica of a Picasso painting that differs only very slightly from a genuine painting.

# References
[[Generative Deep Learning]]